---
title: "The Problem with Video Tutorials"
date: 2014-11-23
tags: learning, interfaces
---

I try to spend most of my time learning new things. Some of the things I've been learning most recently include how to bake, how to make props, how to program in Clojurescript, and how to work with Quaternions.

Since I need to use a lot of software to create interactive media, learning to use software and programming APIs is part of my daily life.

At the moment, the major software teaching approaches on the internet fall into the following categories:

- Q&A Style Forums
- Text Tutorials
- Video Tutorials

I really like forum style answers from sites like Stack Overflow because they answer specific questions and are easily searchable. However, because they are so limited in scope, they are rarely effective at providing introductions to techniques; deferring to text or video tutorials for that purpose.

I like text tutorials because they are easily glanceable. If the tutorial is well-organized, I can easily find the answer to my specific question without having to waste my time by wading through explanations of things I already know. Unfortunately, text is static and can't convey complex visual techniques. Well-chosen and annotated images can help to alleviate this problem, but they can't replace someone actually demonstrating how to do something.

Demonstration is the selling point of video tutorials. Recording a video of doing something seems much easier than writing a comprehensive explanation. Because of this apparently low barrier to entry, the quantity of video tutorials far outstrips the quantity of other software explanations on the internet. Ultimately, video tutorials have two severe flaws.

1. They are not glanceable. Skimming a video of a software demonstration isn't very helpful because the audio is just as or more important than the visuals. Most video player interfaces are designed around watching a video from start to finish. Tutorials do not benefit from this structure.

2. They are easy to structure poorly. While making a well-structured video tutorial is actually much harder than creating a well-structured text tutorial; it just seems easier to get started with a video tutorial: you're just talking to a camera, how hard could that be?

I think the best tutorials and explanations consist of a hybrid of text, video, and interactivity. Using this approach, teachers can create well-structured, glanceable representations that allow learners to experiment in the context of the lesson.

Bret Victor has created some early experiments in this direction:

- [http://worrydream.com/#!/LearnableProgramming](http://worrydream.com/#!/LearnableProgramming)

- [http://worrydream.com/#!/MediaForThinkingTheUnthinkable](http://worrydream.com/#!/MediaForThinkingTheUnthinkable)

- [http://worrydream.com/#!/ScientificCommunicationAsSequentialArt](http://worrydream.com/#!/ScientificCommunicationAsSequentialArt)